## Keynote

**Moderator:** *So that was your applause, Glenn! Welcome to the 30th Chaos Communication Congress, in Hamburg. The floor is yours!*

**Greenwald:**
Thank you, thank you very much.

Thank you everybody, for that warm welcome, and thank you as well to
the Congress organizers for inviting me to speak.

My reaction, when I learned that I had been asked to deliver the
keynote to this conference, was probably similar to the one some of you
had, which was, "wait, what?"

[audience laughs]

And the reason is that my cryptographic and hacker skills are not
exactly world-renowned. You know, the story has been told many times
of how I almost lost the biggest national security story in the last
decade, at least because I found the installation of PGP to be
insurmountably annoying and difficult.

[audience applauds]

There's another story, that's very similar, that illustrates the same
point, that I actually don't think has been told before, which is:
prior to my going to Hong Kong, I spent many hours with both Laura
Poitras and Edward Snowden, trying to get up to speed on the basics of
security technology that I would need in order to report on this
story. They tried to tutor me in all sorts of programs, and finally
concluded that the only one, at least at that time, for that moment,
that I could handle, was [TrueCrypt](https://truecrypt.org).

They taught me the basics of TrueCrypt, and when I went to Hong Kong,
before I would go to sleep, I would play around with TrueCrypt. I kind
of taught myself a couple of functions that they hadn't even taught me
and really had this sort of confidence.

On the third or fourth day, I went over to meet both of them, and I
was beaming with pride. I showed them all of the new things that I had
taught myself how to do on TrueCrypt, and pronounced myself this
Cryptographic Master. That I was really becoming advanced.

I looked at both of them, and I didn't see any return pride coming my
way. Actually, what I saw was them trying, really hard, to avoid
rolling their eyes out of their heads at me, to one another.

I said, "Why are you reacting that way? Why isn't that a great
accomplishment?" They sort of let some moments go by. No one wanted to
break it to me, until finally Snowden piped in and said, "TrueCrypt is
really meant for your little kid brother to be able to master. It's
not all that impressive."

[audience laughs]

I remember being very deflated, and kind of going back to the drawing
board. Well, that was six months ago. In the interim, the importance
of security technology and privacy technology has become really
central to everything it is that I do. I really have learned an
enormous amount, about both its importance and how it functions. And
I'm far from the only one. I think one of the most significant
outcomes of the last six months, but one of the most under discussed,
is how many people now appreciate the importance of protecting the
security of their communications.

If you go and look at my inbox from July, probably 3-5% of the emails
I received were composed of PGP code. That percentage is definitely
above 50% today, and probably well above 50%. When we talked about
forming our new media company, we barely spent any time on the
question. It was simply assumed that we were all going to use the most
sophisticated encryption that was available to communicate with one
another.

And I think, most encouragingly, whenever I'm contacted by anyone in
journalism or activism, or any related fields, they either use
encryption, or are embarrassed and ashamed that they don't, and
apologize for the fact that they don't, and vow that they're soon
going to.

It's a really remarkable sea-change, even from the middle of last
year, when I would talk to some of the leading national security
journalists, *in the world*, who were working on some of the most
sensitive information, and virtually none of them knew what PGP or OTR
or any other of the leading privacy technologies were, let alone how
to use them. It's really encouraging to see this technology spreading
so pervasively.

I think that this underscores an extremely important point, one that
gives me great cause for optimism. I'm often asked whether I think
that the stories that we've been learning over the last six months,
the reporting and the debates that have arisen will actually change
anything and impose any real limits on the US surveillance state.

Typically, when people think the answer to that question is yes, the
thing that they cite most commonly is probably the least significant,
which is that there's going to be some kind of debate, and our
representatives in democratic government are going to respond to our
debate, and they're going to impose limits with legislative reform.

None of that is likely to happen. The US government and its allies are
not going to voluntarily restrict their own surveillance powers in any
meaningful way. In fact, the tactic of the US government that we see
over and over, that we've seen historically, is to do the very
opposite, which is that when they get caught doing something that
brings them disrepute and causes scandal and concern, they're very
adept at pretending to reform themselves through symbolic gestures,
while at the same time, doing very little other than placating citizen
anger and often increasing their own powers that created the scandal
in the first place.

We saw that in the mid-1970s, when there was serious concern and alarm
in the United States, at least as much as there is now, if not more
so, of the US government's surveillance capabilities and abuse. What
the US government did in response was that they said, "Well, we're
going to engage in all of these reforms, that will safeguard these
powers. We're going to create a special court that the government
needs to go to to get permission before they can target people with
surveillance."

That sounded great, but then they created the court in the most warped
way possible. It's a secret court, where only the government gets to
show up, where only the most pro-national security judges are
appointed. So this court gave the appearance of oversight, when in
reality it's the most grotesque rubber stamp that is known to the
Western world. They almost never disapprove of anything. It simply
created the appearance that there was judicial oversight.

They also said they were going to create Congressional committees. The
intelligence committees that are going to have as their main function
overseeing the intelligence committees, and making certain that they
no longer abuse their power. What they did instead was immediately
install the most servile loyalists of the intelligence committees as
head of this "oversight committee".

That's been going on for decades, and today we have two of the most
slavish, pro-NSA members of Congress as the heads of these committees
who are really there to bolster and justify everything and anything
the NSA does, rather than engage in real oversight. So, again, it's
designed to prettify the process while bringing about no real reform.

This process is now repeating itself. You see the President appoint a
handful of his closest loyalists to this "independent White House
panel" that pretended to issue a report that was very balanced and
critical of the surveillance state, but in reality, introduced a
variety of programs that, at the very best, would simply make these
programs slightly more palatable from a public perspective, and in
many cases, intensify the powers of the surveillance state, rather than
reining them in in any meaningful way.

So the answer to whether we're or not going to have meaningful reform
definitely does not lie in the typical processes of democratic
accountability that we're all taught to respect. But they do lie
elsewhere. It is possible that there will be courts that will impose
some meaningful restrictions by finding that the programs are
unconstitutional.

It's much more possible that other countries around the world who are
truly indignant about the breaches of their privacy security will band
together and create alternatives, either in terms of infrastructure,
or legal regimes that will prevent the United States from exercising
hegemony over the Internet or make the cost of doing so far too high.
I think, even more promising is the fact that large private
corporations, Internet companies and others will start finally paying
a price for their collaboration with this spying regime.

We've seen that already, when they've been dragged into the light, and
finally now are forced to account for what it is that they're doing,
and to realize that their economic interests are imperiled by the
spying system, exercising their unparalleled power to demand that it
be reined in. I think that all of those things are very possible as
serious constraints on the surveillance state.

But I ultimately think that where the greatest hope lies is with the
people in this room and the skills that all of you possess. The
privacy technologies that have already been developed: the Tor
Browser, PGP, OTR, and a variety of other products are making real
inroads in preventing the US government and its allies from invading
the sanctity of our communications.

None of them is perfect. None of them is invulnerable, but they all
pose a serious obstacle to the US government's ability to continue to
destroy our privacy. And ultimately, the battle over Internet freedom,
the question of whether or not the Internet will really be this tool
of liberation and democratization and whether it'll become the worst
tool of human oppression in all of human history will be fought out,
I think, primarily, on the technological battlefield.

The NSA and the US government certainly knows that. That's why Keith
Alexander gets dressed up in his little costumes, his dad jeans and
his edgy black shirt and goes to hacker conferences.

[audience applauds]

And it's why corporations in Silicon Valley, like Palantir
Technologies, spend so much effort depicting themselves as these
kind-of rebellious, pro-civil-libertarian factions, as they spend most
of their time in secret working hand-in-hand with the intelligence
community and the CIA to increase their capabilities, because they
want to recruit particularly younger brainpower onto their side, the
side of destroying privacy and putting the Internet to use for the
world's most powerful factions.

What the outcome of this conflict is, what the Internet ultimately
becomes really is not answerable in any definitive way now. It depends
so much on what it is that we, as human beings, do. One of the most
pressing questions is whether people like the ones who are in this
room, and the people who have the skills that you have, now and in the
future, will succumb to those temptations, and go to work for the very
entities that are attempting to destroy privacy around the world, or
whether you will put your talents, skills and resources, to defending
human beings from those invasions, and continuing to create effective
technologies to protect our privacy. I am very optimistic, because
that power does lie in your hands.

[audience applauds]

I want to talk about another cause for optimism that I have, which is
that the pro-privacy alliance is a lot healthier and more vibrant.
It's a lot bigger and stronger than, I think, a lot of us, even who
are in it, often appreciate and realize. Even more so, it is rapidly
growing. And, I think, inexorably growing.

I know, for me, personally, every single thing that I have done, over
the last six months, on this story, and all of the platforms I've been
given, like this speech and the honors that I've received, and the
accolades that I've been given, are ones that I share completely with
two people who have been critically important to everything that I
have done.

One of them is my unbelievably brave and incomparably brilliant
collaborator, Laura Poitras.

[audience applauds]

You know, Laura doesn't get a huge amount of attention, which is how
she likes it, but she really does deserve every last recognition,
honor and award because although it sounds cliche, it really is the
case that without her, none of this would have happened.

We have talked every single day, virtually, over the last six months.
We have made almost every decision, certainly every significant one,
in complete partnership and collaboration. Being able to work with
somebody who has that high level of understanding about Internet
security, about strategies for protecting privacy, has been completely
indispensable to the success of what we've been able to achieve.

And then, the second person who has been utterly indispensable and
deserves every last accolade, and to share in every last award, is my
[? 14:46] source, Edward Snowden.

[audience applauds]

It is really hard to put into words what a profound effect his choice
has had on me, and on Laura, and on the people with whom we've worked
directly, and on people with whom we've indirectly worked, and then
millions and millions of people around the world. The courage and the
principled act of conscience that he displayed will shape and inspire
me for the rest of my life, and will inspire and convince millions and
millions of people to take all sorts of acts that they might not have
taken because they've seen what good for the world can be done by even
a single individual.

[audience applauds]

But I think that it's so important to realize, and to me, this is the
critical point, is that none of us, the three of us, did what we did
in a vacuum. We were all inspired by people who have done similar
things in the past. I'm absolutely certain that Edward Snowden was
inspired in all sorts of ways by the heroism and self-sacrifice of
Chelsea Manning.

[audience applauds and cheers]

And I'm quite certain that, in one way or another, she (Chelsea
Manning) was inspired by the whole litany of whistle blowers and other
people of conscience who came before her to blow the whistle on
extreme levels of corruption, wrongdoing and illegality among the
world's most powerful factions. They in turn were inspired, I'm
certain, by the person who is one of my greatest political heroes,
Daniel Ellsberg, who did this forty years ago.

[audience applauds]

Even beyond that, I think it is really important to realize that
everything that has been allowed to happen over the last six months,
and I think, any kind of significant leak and whistle blowing of
classified information in the digital age, both past and future, owes
a huge debt of gratitude to the organization which really pioneered
the template, and that's [WikiLeaks](https://wikileaks.org).

[audience applauds]

You know, we didn't completely copy, to the letter, the model of
WikiLeaks. We modified it a little bit, just like WikiLeaks modified
what it has decided it's best tactics and strategies, as it went along
and I'm sure people who come after us will modify what we have done to
improve on what we have done and to avoid some of our mistakes and
some of the attacks that have actually been successful. But I think
the point that is really underscored here, and it was underscored for
me, probably most powerfully, when Edward Snowden was rescued from
Hong Kong, from probable arrest and imprisonment for the next thirty
years by the United States, not only by WikiLeaks, but by an
extraordinarily courageous and heroic woman, Sarah Harrison.

There's a huge network of human beings, around the world, who believe
in this cause, and not only believe in it, but are increasingly
willing to devote their energies and their resources, and their time,
and to sacrifice for it. There's a reason that that's remarkable, and
it kind of occurred to me in a telephone call that I had with Laura,
probably two months or so ago. Although we've communicated every day,
we've almost never communicated by telephone. One of the few
exceptions was we were going to speak at an event at the [Electronic
Frontier Foundation](https://www.eff.org) and we got on the phone the
night before to sort-of talk about what ground she would cover, and
what ground I would cover.

What she said to me is, "You know, it's amazing if you think about
it." She went through the list of people who have devoted themselves
to transparency and the price that they have paid. She said Edward
Snowden is stuck in Russia facing thirty years in prison, Chelsea
Manning is in prison, Aaron Swartz committed suicide. People like
Jeremy Hammond and Barrett Brown are the subjects of grotesquely
overzealous prosecutions by virtue of the acts of transparency they've
engaged in. Even people like Jim Risen, who is with an organization
like the New York Times, faces the possibility of prison for stories
that he's published.

Laura and I have been advised by countless lawyers that it is not safe
for us to even travel to our own country, and she said, "It's really a
sign of how sick our political future has become, that the price for
bringing transparency to the government, and for doing the job of the
media, and the Congress, that they're not doing, is this extreme form
of punishment."

You know, she was right, and she had a good point. I had a hard time
disagreeing with the thing that anybody would. But I said, you know,
there's actually another interesting point that that list reveals. The
thing that's so interesting to me about that list is that it actually
keeps growing, as long as it is. The reason why that's so amazing to
me is because the reason the people on that list, and others like
them, pay a price, is because the United States knows that it's only
hope for continuing to maintain its regimen of secrecy, behind which
it can engage in those radical and corrupt acts, is to intimidate,
deter and threaten people who are would-be whistle blowers and
transparency activists from coming forward and doing what it is that
they do by showing them that they would be subjected to even the most
extreme punishments and there's nothing anybody can do about it.

[audience applauds]

It's an effective tactic. It works for some people, not because those
people are cowardly, but because they're rational. It really is the
case that the United States and the British government are not only
willing, but able to essentially engage in any conduct, no matter how
grotesque, no matter how extreme, no matter how lawless, with very
little opposition that they perceive is enough to make them not want
to do it. So there are activists who rationally conclude that it's not
worth the price for me to pay in order to engage in that behavior.
That's why they continue to do it. But the paradox is that there are a
lot of other people, I think even more people, who react in exactly
the opposite way.

When they see the US and the UK government showing their true face,
showing the extent to which they're willing to abuse their power, they
don't become scared or deterred, they become even more emboldened. And
the reason for that is that when you see that these governments are
really capable of that level of abuse of power, you realize that you
can no longer, in good conscience, stand by and do nothing. It becomes
an even greater imperative for you to come forward and shine a light
on what they're doing, and if you listen to any of those
whistle blowers or activists, they'll all say the same thing.

It was a slow process to realize that the acts in which you engage are
justified but they were finally convinced of it by the actions of
these governments themselves. It's a really sweet irony, and I think
it calls for serious optimism that it is the United States and its
closest allies who are sowing the seeds of dissent, who are fueling
the fire of this activism with their own abusive behavior.

[audience applauds]

Now, speaking of the attempt to intimidate and deter, and the like, I
just want to spend a few minutes talking about the current posture of
the United States government, with regard to Edward Snowden. It's
become extremely clear, at this point, that the US government, from
the highest levels on down, is completely committed to pursuing only
one outcome. That outcome is one where Edward Snowden ends up spending
several decades, if not the rest of his life, in a small cage,
probably cut off, in terms of communication, with the rest of the
world. And the reason why they're so intent on doing that is not hard
to see. It's not because they're worried, that society needs to be
protected from Edward Snowden, and from him repeating these actions. I
think it's probably a pretty safe bet that Edward Snowden's security
clearance is more or less permanently revoked.

[audience laughter]

The reason they're so intent on it is because they cannot allow Edward
Snowden to live any sort of a decent and free life because they're
petrified that that will inspire other people to follow his example,
and to be unwilling to maintain this bond of secrecy when maintaining
that bond does nothing but hide illegal and damaging conduct from the
people who are most affected by it.

And what I find most amazing about that is not that the United States
government is doing that, that's what they do. It's who they are. What
I find amazing about it is that there are so many governments around
the world, including ones that are capable of protecting his human
rights, and who have been the biggest beneficiaries of his heroic
revelations, who are willing to stand by and watch his human rights be
crushed, him be imprisoned for the crime of showing the world what's
being done to their privacy.

[audience applauds]

It has really been startling to watch governments, including some of
the largest in Europe, and their leaders, go out in public and express
intense indignation over the fact that the privacy of their citizens
is being systematically breached, and genuine indignation when they
learn that their privacy has also been targeted.

[audience laughs, applauds]

Yet, at the same time, the person who sacrificed in order to defend
their basic human rights, their rights to privacy, is now having his
own human rights targeted and threatened in recrimination. And I
realize that for any country like Germany or France, or Brazil, or any
other country around the world, to defy the dictates of the United
States, that there's a cost of doing that. But there was an even
greater cost to Edward Snowden to come forward and do what he did in
defense of *your* rights, and yet he did it anyway.

[audience applauds]

I think that what's really important to realize is that countries have
the legal and the international obligations, by virtues of the
treaties that they've signed, to defend Edward Snowden from political
persecution, and prevent him from being in a cage for the rest of his
life, for having shone a light on systematic abuses of privacy, and
other forms of abuses of secrecy. But they also have the ethical and
moral obligation as the beneficiaries of his actions, to do what he
did for them, which is to protect his rights in return.

[audience applauds]

I want to spend a little bit of time talking about one of my favorite
topics, which is journalism. When I was in Hong Kong, with Laura and
Ed Snowden, and I've been reflecting on this a lot in the course of
writing a book that I've been writing over the course of the past
couple of months about everything that's happened, one of the things I
realized in looking back on that moment and also in talking to Laura
about what took place there was that we spent at least as much time
talking about issues relating to journalism and a free press as we did
talking about surveillance policy. The reason is that we knew that
what we were about to do would trigger as many debates over the proper
role of journalists *vis a vis* the state and other power factions as
it would the importance of Internet freedom and privacy, and the
threat of the surveillance state.

We knew, in particular, that one of our most formidable adversaries
was not simply going to be the intelligence agencies on which we were
reporting, and who we were trying to expose, but also their most
loyal, devoted servants, which calls itself the United States and
British media.

[audience applauds]


And so we spent a great deal of time strategizing about it, we
resolved that we were going to have to be very disruptive of the
status quo. Not only the surveillance and political status quo, but
also the journalistic status quo. And, I think, one of the ways we can
see what it is we were targeting these and the behavior of the media
over the past six months since these revelations have emerged almost
entirely without them and despite them.

One of the more remarkable things that has happened to me is I gave an
interview, three weeks or so, or a month ago, on BBC, it was on this
program called Hard Talk, and I, at one point, thought I had made what
I thought was the very unremarkable and uncontroversial observation,
that the reason why we have a free press is because national security
officials routinely lie to the population in order to shield their
power and to get their agenda advanced, and that the goal and duty of
a journalist is to be adversarial to those people in power, and that
the pronouncements that this interviewer was citing about how these
government programs are critical to stopping terrorists should not be
believed unless there's actual evidence shown, that they're actually
true.

[audience applauds]

When I said that, he interrupted me, (and I'm sorry, I don't do
pompous British accents well, so you'll just have to transpose it into
your own imagination onto what I'm saying), and he said, "I just need
to stop you, you have said something so remarkable!" He was like a
Victorian priest scandalized by seeing a woman pull up her skirt a
little bit above her ankles.

[audience laughs]

He said, "I just cannot believe that you would suggest that senior
officials, generals in the United States and British government, are
actually making false claims to the public! How can you possibly say
something like that?"

[audience laughs, applauds]

And that is not aberrational. It really is the central view of,
certainly, American and British media stars, that when, especially
people with medals on their chests, who are called generals, but also
high-ranking officials in the government, make claims, that those
claims are presumptively treated as true without evidence, and that
it's almost immoral to call them into question, or to question their
veracity.


Obviously, we went through the Iraq war, in which those two very same
governments specifically and deliberately lied, repeatedly, to their
people, over the course of two years, to justify an aggressive war
that destroyed a country of 26 million people. But we've seen it
continuously over the last six months as well. The very first document
that Edward Snowden ever showed me was one that he explained would
reveal unquestionable lying, by the senior national intelligence
official of President Obama, the Director of National Intelligence,
James Clapper. That was the document that revealed that the Obama
administration had succeeded in convincing a secret court to compel
phone companies to turn over, to the NSA, every single phone record,
of every single telephone call, local and international, of every
single American, even though that National Security official, James
Clapper, before the Senate, just months earlier, was asked, "Does the
NSA collect whole data about the communications of Americans?" and he
answered, "No, sir," what we all now know is a complete lie.

There are other lies that the NSA and the US government's top
officials have told. And by 'lie' I mean, advisedly, things they know
to be false that they're saying anyway to convince people of what they
want them to believe. Keith Alexander, the head of the NSA, repeatedly
said that they are incapable of accounting for the exact number of
calls and emails that they intercept from the American
telecommunications system, even the program that we ended up exposing,
Boundless Informant, counts with exact mathematical precision, exactly
the data that he said he is incapable of providing. Or the NSA and the
GCHQ, which have repeatedly said, that the purpose of these programs
is to protect people from terrorism, and to safeguard national
security, and that they never, unlike those evil thieves, engage in
spying for economic reasons.

And yet, report after report that we revealed, from spying on the
Brazilian oil giant, Petrobras, to the spying on the Organization of
American States and economic summits where economic accords were
negotiated, to energy companies around the world in Europe, Asia and
Latin America, just completely negate these claims, prove that they
are lies. And then we have President Obama, who repeatedly says things
like, "We cannot, and do not, spy or eavesdrop on the communications
of Americans without warrants, even though the 2008 law that was
enacted by the Congress, of which he was a part, had [? 34:49 ->
34:50] the US government to eavesdrop American's communications
without warrants.

And what you see here, is real lying. And yet, at the same time, the
same media that sees it acts scandalized if you suggest that their
claims should not be taken at face value, without evidence, because
their role is not to be adversarial. Their role is to be loyal
spokespeople to those powerful factions that they pretend to exercise
oversight.

[audience applauds]

Just one more point on that, which is to understand just how the
American and British media function. You can pretty much turn on the
TV, at any moment, or open an Internet website, and see very brave
American journalists calling Edward Snowden a criminal and demanding
that he be extradited to the United States, and prosecuted and
imprisoned. They're very very brave when it comes to declaring people
who are scorned in Washington, and who have no power, and have become
marginalized. They're very brave in condemning them, standing up to
them, and demanding that the rule of law be applied to them
faithfully. "He broke the law, he must pay the consequences."

And yet, the top national security official of the United States
government went to the senate and lied to their faces, everybody now
knows, which is at least much of a serious crime as anything Edward
Snowden is accused of.

[audience applauds]

You will be very hard pressed to find even a single one of those
brave, intrepid journalists, ever thinking about, let alone expressing
the idea that Director of National Intelligence James Clapper ought to
be subject to the rule of law and be prosecuted and imprisoned for the
crimes that he committed because the role of the US media and their
British counterparts is to be voices for those with the greatest
power, and to protect their interests and serve them.

Everything that we've done over the last six months, and everything
that we've decided over the last month about forming a new media
organization, is all about trying to subvert that process and
reanimate, and reinstill the process of journalism for what it was
intended to be, which was as a true adversarial force, a check against
those with the greatest power.

[audience applauds]

So I just want to close with one last point, which is, the nature of
the surveillance state that we've reported over the last six months.
Every time I do an interview, people ask similar questions such as,
what is the most significant story that you have revealed, or what is
it that we have learned about the last story that you just published.
And what I've really begun saying is that there really is only one
overarching point that all of these stories have revealed.

And that is, and I say this without the slightest bit of hyperbole or
melodrama, it's not metaphorical and it's not figurative, it is
literally true, that the goal of the NSA, and its Five Eyes partners
in the English-speaking world: Canada, New Zealand, Australia and
especially the UK, is to eliminate privacy globally. To ensure that
there can be no human communications that occur electronically, that
evades their surveillance network.

They want to make sure that all forms of human communication, by
telephone or by Internet, and all online activities, are collected,
monitored, stored, and analyzed by that agency, and by their allies.
That means that to describe that is to describe a ubiquitous
surveillance state. You don't need hyperbole to make that point, and
you don't need to believe me when I say that that's their goal.
Document after document within the archive that Edward Snowden
provided us declare that to be their goal. They are obsessed with
searching out any small little crevice on the planet where some form
of communication might take place without their being able to invade
it.

One of the stories that we're working on now (I used to get in trouble
when I was at The Guardian for previewing my stories, I'm not at The
Guardian anymore so I'm going to do it anyway), is: the NSA and the
GCHQ are being driven crazy by the idea that you can go on an airplane
and use certain cellphone devices or Internet services and be away
from their prying eyes for a few hours at a time. They are obsessed
with finding ways to invade the systems of online, onboard Internet
services and mobile phone services. The very idea that human beings
can communicate, even for a few moments, without them being able to
collect, and store, analyze, and monitor what it is that we're saying,
is simply intolerable. That is their institutional mandate.

And when I get asked questions, when I do interviews in different
countries, well, "Why would they want to spy on this official?" Or,
"Why would they want to spy on Sweden?" Or, "Why would they want to
target this company here?" The premise of that question is really
flawed. The premise of the question is that the NSA and the GCHQ need
a specific reason to target somebody for surveillance. That is not how
they think. They target every form of communication that they can
possibly get their hands on. And if you think about what individual
privacy does for us, as human beings, let alone what it does for us on
a political level, that it really is the thing that lets us explore
boundaries and engage in creativity, and use the mechanisms of dissent
without fear. When you think about the world in which privacy is
allowed to be eliminated, you're really talking about eliminating
everything that makes it valuable to be a free individual.

The surveillance state, by its necessity, by its very existence,
breeds conformity, because when human beings know that they're always
susceptible to being watched, even if they're not always being
watched, the choices that they make are far more constrained, are far
more limited, cling far more closely to orthodoxy, than when they can
act in the private realm, and that's precisely why the NSA and GCHQ,
and the world's most powerful tyrannies throughout history now, always
as their first goal, have the elimination of privacy at the top of
their list, because it's what ensures that human beings can no longer
resist the decrees that they're issuing.

[audience applauds]

Well, thank you, once again very much.
